SPEC.md, before:

# cl-dplyr Specification

## 1. Overview
`cl-dplyr` is a Common Lisp data manipulation library inspired by R's `dplyr`. It provides a grammar of data manipulation, offering a consistent set of verbs that help you solve the most common data manipulation challenges. It is built on top of `cl-tibble` and `cl-vctrs-lite`.

## 2. dependencies
- **cl-tibble**: Provides the dataframe structure (`tibble`) and fundamental column access/binding operations.
- **cl-vctrs-lite**: Provides the underlying vector operations, recycling rules, and type stability.
- **serapeum/alexandria**: General utilities.

## 3. Architecture

The library will consist of two layers:
1.  **Functional Layer**: Functions that perform operations. Arguments for column names must be explicitly quoted (keywords or strings) or passed as accessor functions.
2.  **DSL Layer (Sugar)**: Macros that allow for non-standard evaluation (NSE)-like behavior, allowing users to use unquoted column names and threading expressions.

### 3.1 Data Structures
- **Tibble**: The standard input/output for most verbs.
- **Grouped Tibble**: A subclass or wrapper around a standard tibble that includes grouping metadata (indices of groups).

## 4. Core Verbs (Functional Layer)

All functions take a `tibble` as their first argument and return a new `tibble`.

### 4.1 Row Operations
- **`slice(df, indices)`**: specific rows by index.
- **`filter(df, predicate)`**: Subset rows using a predicate function (or expression in DSL).
- **`arrange(df, &rest order-specs)`**: Order rows by variables.
- **`distinct(df, &rest variables)`**: Keep distinct rows.

### 4.2 Column Operations
- **`select(df, &rest selection)`**: Select, rename, and reorder columns.
- **`rename(df, &rest renaming)`**: Rename specific columns.
- **`mutate(df, &rest mutations)`**: Add or modify columns. Needs to handle:
    - Vector recycling (using `cl-vctrs-lite`).
    - Referring to specialized columns just created within the same `mutate` call.
- **`pull(df, var)`**: Extract a single column as a vector.

### 4.3 Grouping and Aggregation
- **`group_by(df, &rest variables)`**: Converts a tibble into a grouped tibble.
- **`ungroup(df)`**: Removes grouping metadata.
- **`summarise(df, &rest summaries)`**: Reduces groups to single values.
    - If grouped, returns one row per group.
    - If ungrouped, returns a 1-row independent tibble.

### 4.4 Joins
- **`inner_join(x, y, by)`**
- **`left_join(x, y, by)`**
- **`right_join(x, y, by)`**
- **`full_join(x, y, by)`**
- **`semi_join(x, y, by)`**
- **`anti_join(x, y, by)`**

## 5. DSL / Syntactic Sugar
The "Sugar" layer provides a high-level DSL that mimics R's Tidyverse notation, reducing the need for explicit lambdas and column accessors.

### 5.1 Reader Macros
- **`#c"name"`**: Refers to a column named "name" (case-insensitive, usually keywords).
- **`#r"name"`**: Refers to a row name.

### 5.2 Vectorized Operators
Special operators are provided that automatically perform vectorized operations on columns and constants:
- **`==`**: Equal to.
- **`%=`**: Equal to (keyword-safe).
- **`!=`, `/=`**: Not equal to.
- **`>` , `<` , `>=` , `<=`**: Standard comparisons.
- **`&`, `|`, `!`**: Boolean logic (vectorized).

### 5.3 Verb Macros
The core verbs (`filter`, `mutate`, `summarise`, etc.) are implemented as macros that detect DSL expressions and expand them into functional calls with appropriate lambdas.

**Example Comparison:**
- **Functional Style:**
  ```lisp
  (filter df (lambda (d) (vec-p= (tbl-col d :city) "London")))
  ```
- **DSL Style:**
  ```lisp
  (filter df (== #c"city" "London"))
  ;; or
  (filter df (== :city "London"))
  ```

### 5.4 Piping
Use `->` or `->>` for clean data pipelines.

```lisp
(-> df
    (filter (== :city "London"))
    (mutate :new-val (* :x 2))
    (summarise :mean-val (mean :new-val)))
```

## 6. Implementation roadmap
1.  **Foundation**: Setup package, `slice`, `select` (wrappers around `cl-tibble`).
2.  **Transformation**: `mutate` and `transmute` (requires topological sort or sequential evaluation context).
3.  **Filtering & Sorting**: `filter` and `arrange`.
4.  **Grouping**: `group_by` and `summarise` (the most complex logic).
5.  **Joins**: Relational algebra.

Commit message:

add to arrange and mutate :asc :desc :n n-distinct

SPEC.md, after:

# cl-dplyr Specification

## 1. Overview
`cl-dplyr` is a Common Lisp data manipulation library inspired by R's `dplyr`. It provides a grammar of data manipulation, offering a consistent set of verbs that help you solve the most common data manipulation challenges. It is built on top of `cl-tibble` and `cl-vctrs-lite`.

## 2. dependencies
- **cl-tibble**: Provides the dataframe structure (`tibble`) and fundamental column access/binding operations.
- **cl-vctrs-lite**: Provides the underlying vector operations, recycling rules, and type stability.
- **serapeum/alexandria**: General utilities.

## 3. Architecture

The library will consist of two layers:
1.  **Functional Layer**: Functions that perform operations. Arguments for column names must be explicitly quoted (keywords or strings) or passed as accessor functions.
2.  **DSL Layer (Sugar)**: Macros that allow for non-standard evaluation (NSE)-like behavior, allowing users to use unquoted column names and threading expressions.

### 3.1 Data Structures
- **Tibble**: The standard input/output for most verbs.
- **Grouped Tibble**: A subclass or wrapper around a standard tibble that includes grouping metadata (indices of groups).

## 4. Core Verbs (Functional Layer)

All functions take a `tibble` as their first argument and return a new `tibble`.

### 4.1 Row Operations
- **`slice(df, indices)`**: specific rows by index.
- **`filter(df, predicate)`**: Subset rows using a predicate function (or expression in DSL).
- **`arrange(df, &rest order-specs)`**: Order rows by variables.
- **`distinct(df, &rest variables)`**: Keep distinct rows.

### 4.2 Column Operations
- **`select(df, &rest selection)`**: Select, rename, and reorder columns.
- **`rename(df, &rest renaming)`**: Rename specific columns.
- **`mutate(df, &rest mutations)`**: Add or modify columns. Needs to handle:
    - Vector recycling (using `cl-vctrs-lite`).
    - Referring to specialized columns just created within the same `mutate` call.
- **`pull(df, var)`**: Extract a single column as a vector.

### 4.3 Grouping and Aggregation
- **`group_by(df, &rest variables)`**: Converts a tibble into a grouped tibble.
- **`ungroup(df)`**: Removes grouping metadata.
- **`summarise(df, &rest summaries)`**: Reduces groups to single values.
    - If grouped, returns one row per group.
    - If ungrouped, returns a 1-row independent tibble.

### 4.4 Joins
- **`inner_join(x, y, by)`**
- **`left_join(x, y, by)`**
- **`right_join(x, y, by)`**
- **`full_join(x, y, by)`**
- **`semi_join(x, y, by)`**
- **`anti_join(x, y, by)`**

## 5. DSL / Syntactic Sugar
The "Sugar" layer provides a high-level DSL that mimics R's Tidyverse notation, reducing the need for explicit lambdas and column accessors.

### 5.1 Reader Macros
- **`#c"name"`**: Refers to a column named "name" (case-insensitive, usually keywords).
- **`#r"name"`**: Refers to a row name.

### 5.2 Vectorized Operators
Special operators are provided that automatically perform vectorized operations on columns and constants:
- **`==`**: Equal to.
- **`%=`**: Equal to (keyword-safe).
- **`!=`, `/=`**: Not equal to.
- **`>` , `<` , `>=` , `<=`**: Standard comparisons.
- **`&`, `|`, `!`**: Boolean logic (vectorized).

### 5.3 Verb Macros
The core verbs (`filter`, `mutate`, `summarise`, etc.) are implemented as macros that detect DSL expressions and expand them into functional calls with appropriate lambdas.

**Example Comparison:**
- **Functional Style:**
  ```lisp
  (filter df (lambda (d) (vec-p= (tbl-col d :city) "London")))
  ```
- **DSL Style:**
  ```lisp
  (filter df (== #c"city" "London"))
  ;; or
  (filter df (== :city "London"))
  ```

### 5.4 Piping
Use `->` or `->>` for clean data pipelines.

```lisp
(-> df
    (filter (== :city "London"))
    (mutate :new-val (* :x 2))
    (summarise :mean-val (mean :new-val)))
```

### 5.5 DSL Helpers
Context-aware functions that work within verbs:
- **`n()`**: Returns row count (context dependent).
- **`n-distinct(x)`**: Returns count of unique values.
- **`desc(x)` / `asc(x)`**: Ordering helpers.

### 5.6 Future Vector Helpers
To avoid conflicts with Common Lisp symbols, the following mappings or `v-` prefixed versions are planned:
- **`first`, `last`, `nth`**: Will likely map to `v-first`, `v-last`, `v-nth` or be handled specially in DSL.
- **`row_number()`**: Returns vector of indices.
- **`if_else`**, **`case_when`**: Vectorized control flow.


## 6. Implementation roadmap
1.  **Foundation**: Setup package, `slice`, `select` (wrappers around `cl-tibble`).
2.  **Transformation**: `mutate` and `transmute` (requires topological sort or sequential evaluation context).
3.  **Filtering & Sorting**: `filter` and `arrange`.
4.  **Grouping**: `group_by` and `summarise` (the most complex logic).
5.  **Joins**: Relational algebra.
